Smart cities as urbanisation of data:
Towards a critique of urban informatics 



Introduction
In an early text on the topic that later came to be described as ‘urban informatics', E.S. Savas explored how principles of cybernetics can fundamentally transform urban government and make it more effective and efficient (Savas 1970). He identified the urban government as ‘an organized system' and described elements of a cybernetic approach to administrating such a system. The cybernetic approach consists of four moments – (1) setting goal by describing the desired condition of the system, (2) administering change as required by the desired condition, (3) observing effects of the administered change and identifying discrepancies between desired condition (set during the first moment) and actual condition (caused by the second moment), and (4) capturing that discrepancy and its cause, separating the cause from external disturbances/noises, and refining and re-administering the change  – that taken together form the simple cybernetic feedback-control loop mechanism.  Savas proposed that the task of the urban government – the governing of the city – is an operation similar, in principle, to those of calculating the future position of an enemy airplane or missile, optimising production and distribution of products given market conditions, and other informational needs of early and mid-Twentieth century military and industrial production operations that drove the development of cybernetic sciences in the first place (Kittler 1999, Beniger 1986). However, Savas was quick to point out the ‘disturbing realization' that the urban government is significantly different from the systems traditionally addressed by cybernetic sciences – urban governments are run by elected representatives, and the temporal rhythm of electoral politics most often does not fit the time requirements of the urban problems that need solving. He went on to explain the election process as a problematic feedback mechanism of ‘low sampling rate (one sampling per 4 years)' and poor informational richness (only records an ‘yes' or a ‘no' answer for each candidate). He described the Neighbourhood City Halls initiative in New York City as a measure for improving the quality and sampling rate of gathering feedback from the citizens for more informed urban governance, and envisioned a future when computer consoles in these Neighbourhood City Halls would make possible “convenient, decentralized data acquisition and delivery of services, but with centralized coordination and control” (Savas 1970: 1068). It is remarkable that Savas, in his early description of urban informatics (or, cybernetic approach to urban government) pointed out with such clarity the fundamental role of topologies of flow, control and accumulation of data in determining the location and nature of administrative power. 
The contemporary discussions of ‘urban informatics'  and ‘smart cities', however, often fail to emphasise this centrality of the problematic of data (Rheingold 2003, Moss Kanter & Litow 2009, Shepard 2009, Foth et al 2011). While the question of data has always been implicit in these discussions, the focus has tended to be on information infrastructures embedded into the built fabric of the city, various perceptive (‘sense-ability') and reactive (‘sentient') qualities of the infrastructure, and its human and digital layers. There, of course, are ‘smart cities' scholars who do focus on the transformatory role played by urban data, that is data about urban conditions. Foremost among them, Michael Batty writes: 
One of the obvious but much misunderstood features of these new urban technologies is the fact that they produce massive streams of data in real time and space. In cities, there has never been anything equivalent hitherto and we are just beginning to grasp the nature of this ‘big data' as it is being popularly referred to. (Batty 2012: 192)
Even in Batty's account, there remains a more explicit emphasis on the capabilities of the ‘new urban technologies' in producing data, and on the ‘bigness' of such data, instead of how ‘new urban technologies' are being specifically produced and deployed to measure specific experiences of the city and transform them into data within pre-determined networks of circulation, storage and utilisation. In other words, a data-centric account of the ‘smart cities' technologies may attempt to describe how the production of such technologies are motivated and driven by the demand to capture specific kinds of urban data under specific conditions, including that of control over flow of the captured data. The objective of such a reading of these information network technologies would be to explain the intertwined and simultaneous development of the technologies and the urban form they are embedded in, instead of taking the resultant ‘intelligent' built form as an already given starting point for analysing possibilities and challenges of the ‘smart cities'.
The fundamental role of information networks , and the political economy of their specific topologies, in shaping post-industrial urban forms and lives has a long history, especially beginning with two exemplary industrial era inventions of railroads and telegraph. Mobility, both of physical and of informational kind, has been central to the industrial production and consumption processes and patterns. Industrial cities, unlike the pre-industrial typologies of political, merchant and religious cities, have been characterised by the industries of mobility and the industries made possible by such mobility. Only much later, in middle and late twentieth century, informational mobility began dominating over physical mobility as the determining process and instrument for controlling and realising production and consumption activities (Castells 1989). Friedrich Kittler provides a critical insight about the scalar changes experienced by industrial cities and the rising importance of information networks as essential building blocks for the urban settlement:
Since cities no longer lie within the panopticon of the cathedral or castle and can no longer be enclosed by walls or fortifications, a network made up of intersecting networks dissects and connects the city... Regardless of whether these networks transmit information (telephone, radio, television) or energy (water supply, electricity, highway), they all represent forms of information. (If only because every modern energy flow requires a parallel control network.) (Kittler 1996: 718).
Here we see an expansion of the role of information networks. Not only do information networks provide monitoring and controlling facilities for the dispersed production and consumption processes of the global economy, but also become central to operating and maintaining the urban centres of that global economy. The cities imbibe the information infrastructures of the same (actually existing) global capitalist economy that decide their success and form. The transition is of course neither smooth nor homogeneous. However, the capabilities of the information infrastructures substantially fuel and are reinforced by a popular (if not dominant) imagination of how cities can be and how they can be saved from crises of various kinds – ecological, economical, etc. The planetary imagination of this information infrastructure mesh, as dreamt of by earlier proponents of cybernetics, has now expanded to inspire data-driven forms of both public and private lives – from ‘smart cities' to ‘quantified self'. This paper attempts to understand the functioning of the category of ‘data' in the ‘smart cities' discourse, to foreground the urban expansion over and reshaping of the space of data. This is not to argue that the terrain of data is a new or unique space but that it being ‘urbanised' (following Henri Lefebvre), that is the terrain of data is being reorganised for production of the global/planetary urbanisation, from data-driven global network infrastructure to automated micro-environmental management.
Smart cities and the secret of urban data
Between the discussions of Kittler and Savas, there takes place a double intertwining of the urban and the information systems. Firstly, there is recognition of the informational nature of the essential functional networks that contemporary cities are built upon. Secondly, the applied science of informational systems is posited as a potential managerial paradigm for urban governance. Kittler talks about yet another striking area in the related history of urban and information systems – that of the taxonomic analogies. He begins from telegraph days and naming of simple elements of ‘gates’ and ‘ports’, and continues to more complex notions of ‘bus’ and ‘routing’ in computational architecture (Kittler 1996). The urbanist terminological influences upon information system seems to be duly reversed in the origin of the category of ‘smart cities' itself, as inspired by embedding of ‘smart' information and communication technologies in various aspects of urban fabric and activities. 
The integrated ideal of information and information-enabled infrastructure as the physical backbone and the data-driven administration as the operational backbone of urban administration, in reality, has been under constant change with the political economic transformations and shifts of the last half century. Stephen Graham and Simon Marvin give an incisive overview of the process of the retreat of the neoliberal state from urban infrastructural arena and the rise of the ‘international infrastructural capital’ (closely linked with international financial markets) since the last decades of the twentieth century (2001: 91-98). Graham and Marvin further discuss the re-entry of the state as a regulator in the privatised urban infrastructure domain by introducing practices of segmentation of technologies, products and services. For example, in the case of the power industry vertical segmentation would involve separate agencies for power generation, transmission and distribution (or supply), while horizontal segmentation would involve allowing multiple private agencies to function as distributors of power, each buying power from the same state-owned agency responsible for long distance transmission of electricity. Returning to the context of information infrastructure, the idea of ‘smart cities’ can be understood as an industry response to this neoliberal mode of technocratic regulation. The imagery of ‘smarter city-in-a-box’, as Greg Lindsay (2011) describes IBM’s municipality management software suit named the ‘Intelligent Operations Center’ (IBM Industry Solutions Division 2011), perfectly captures the positioning of the product in a governmental climate of regulation by segmentation. The product reclaims a need for unique and uniform software program for the all computational activities of the municipality, that can unify various data-driven urban utilities and achieve economies of scale and interoperability to provide more efficient service at reduced administrative expenses. Cisco has already taken the next step of integrated offering of ‘smart' hardware and software products in the ongoing construction of New Songdo City in South Korea (The Economist 2010: 11), where they are building the complete ‘digital plumbing’ of urban network infrastructure with built-in software solutions for city-wide as well as intra-municipal communication systems. This pioneering exercise in developing a ‘smart city' from the scratch (and the similar PlanIT Valley project in Portugal) gives real-world preview of various discrete ‘smart city' product visions of IBM, Cisco and the alike – from the ‘Broadband City' of pan-city universal high speed Internet connectivity to promote access to civic services and economic opportunities (Heimgartner et al 2005), to creating information infrastructure enabled ‘Smart+Connected Communities' (Villa & Mitchell 2010), to integrated and simultaneous transformation of the core systems to make the entire urban ‘system of systems' smarter (Dirks & Keeling 2009, Villa & Wagener 2008). A core imagination across these ‘smart city' product visions is the ideal of the city functioning as a ‘platform', undertaking specific common infrastructural activities and enabling multiple state and non-state actors to prosume contents, services and products based upon that infrastructural ‘platform'. City administrations have also began to appropriate this metaphor of the ‘platform' to describe a specific mode of urban governance through public-private participation in delivery of civic services and amenities through an ‘open' sharing of urban data, collected by a range of networked devices operated by public, private and individual actors alike (Ingram 2011). ‘Smart city' technologies are being precisely positioned to not only collect and manage content (about the services being delivered) and process (about the service delivery processes) data from multiple urban utilities and to share them through urban data portals and public APIs, but also to do real-time analysis of that data and take decisions based on it, including automated implementation of such data-driven decisions through networked  ‘sentient' infrastructure (Crang & Graham 2007, Batty 2012, Kitchin 2013).
Thus ‘smart cities', as the narrative goes, transform cities into open ‘platforms' for collective sharing and collaboration. The ‘smart city' apparatuses ensure that urban data, collected by diverse actors such as government agencies, private service providers, and ‘sentient' citizens, is circulated back to the populations, to empower them to monitor and ensure accountability of governmental activities and urban amenity provisions, as well as to co-create inclusive urban spaces. Anthony Townsend, famously referred to by Howard Rheingold (2003) as the ‘urban informatician', states in his foreword to the Handbook of Research on Urban Informatics:
	To use a crude analogy, if aerial photography showed us the muscular and skeletal structure of 	the city, the revolution in urban informatics is likely to reveal its circulatory and nervous 	systems. I like to call this vision the “real-time city”, because for the first time we’ll see cities as a 	whole the way biologists see a cell—instantaneously and in excruciating detail, but also alive... 	[T]he real-time city could become a place where everyone is an amateur urban planner, using 	urban informatics to understand the larger impacts of their everyday decisions. (Townsend 	2009: xxvi). 
This analogy of the shift from the astronomer's telescopic gaze to the microbiologist's nano-technical gaze to represent the potential of the data capabilities of the ‘smart city' technologies is very insightful. Mobilising a similar biologic analogy, a report by the IT and Communication Systems team at Arup explains that “data forms part of the ‘connective tissue’ linking these [interconnected urban] systems together” (Buscher et al 2010: 8). It is remarkable how these narratives of the urban data (that is data about urban conditions) assume and normalise the nature of urban data as always already existing. These accounts do not consider data about urban conditions, either in visual form (as suggested by Townsend's analogies of the astronomer's and the biologist's gaze) or in quantified forms, as produced by specific technologies of calculation but as an ever-existing natural fact about the city, observation and recording of which has only been recently made possible due to technological developments.
The secret of data in the ‘smart cities' discussion emanates from this ahistorical assumption of the always already availability of data about urban conditions. In discussing the secret of primitive accumulation, Karl Marx notes how the whole movement of surplus value from its (capitalist) production, to its accumulation as capital, to its investment as capital to make possible capitalist production takes the form of a ‘vicious circle' – one that can only be resolved by identifying a historical moment prior to capitalist accumulation, which is the moment of primitive or original accumulation (Marx 1999: 500). While this paper does not attempt to pursue an urban media infrastructural archaeology to locate (or to locate the possibility of) such a moment, it describes the insights about the ‘smart cities' discourses and practices that can be gained from foregrounding this secret.
Urbanisation of data
As Sam Kinsely argues in another paper in this session, ‘design fictions' play a fundamental role in articulating and shaping the ‘smart cities' discourses and practices, especially as a site of intense cross -pollination of technological fictions and design briefs among software and hardware developers and vendors, interactive media studios, university departments and circulating design researchers. A most crucial early ‘design fiction' to contribute to the framing of the ‘smart cities' imagination was Dan Hill’s blog post proclaiming ‘the street as platform’ (2008). The metaphor of ‘platform’, discussed above as a central element of the ‘smart cities' vision, comes from the domain of computation, where it is employed to characterise methods and ideals of programming that allows a program to be used by multiple others programs and individuals as a functional or informational basis to create shared or separated content. The term was famously mobilised by Tim O’Reilly and John Battelle to formulate ‘the web as platform’ as the first principle of ‘Web 2.0’ (O’Reilly 2005). They deployed the term ‘platform’ to express the ‘architecture of participation’ introduced and facilitated by Web 2.0 technologies and techniques, as opposed to the architecture of publication or broadcasting that characterised ‘Web 1.0'. This ‘architecture of participation’ was referring to both how web applications and sites were being built (the coming of Content Management Systems and Wiki-s), how data sharing was becoming normalised and ubiquitous (banner ads) and also the emergence of users as ‘prosumer’ of content, through blogs, wiki-style directories and encyclopaedias and peer-to-peer file sharing networks. Although in practice, the meaning of ‘platform’ as celebrated by various Web 2.0 services and sites, like Facebook and Flickr, is ambiguous and often contradictory, it draws its rhetoric power from that very ambiguity (Gillespie 2010). Hill’s application of the same notion in describing shifts in built and social architecture of urban streets gives us an entry point to the discourse of data in ‘smart cities’. 
Hill’s post begins with an extensive and fascinating description of various information practices and processes taking place around a generic street scene. In a memorable sentence he persuades the reader to imagine “how the street is immersed in a twitching, pulsing cloud of data” (Hill 2008) being emitted from the Nike+ shoes of the joggers, engine control systems of cars, numerous mobile phones and laptops, electricity consumption and generation (for the solar panels) meters, RFID readers installed in the shops, various cameras part of the transportation management system etc. In this long list of informational activities using ‘the street as platform’, there emerges two categories – (1) activities that took place in the street because the person involved (the one who is carrying the digital device) happen to occupy the street at that time, and (2) activities that involve operational controls and monitoring of the street (such as transport system cameras) and adjacent infrastructure and establishments (such as RFID readers in the shops and Building Information Modeling Systems in the office buildings). Now the first category of activities takes place in the street or in the vicinity of the street because of the street being a space of transit and/or temporary occupation. Further, the complexity of the constantly negotiated and re-negotiated street spaces is transformed into subjective datasets produced by individuals (e.g., joggers wearing Nike+ shoes and kids taking photographs) and objects (e.g., Kindles riding on public Wi-Fi to update user data and engine control systems gathering performance data)  and each dataset fed back into pre-determined and most often closed circulation networks. The street thus is most typically reduced to an abstract geometric geo-locational identifier for  these datasets (e.g., in geo-tagged photographs and trip calculation and visualisation by Nike+ shoes. The street acts as material context and as a socio-emotional setting for these activities, but does not retain any of the produced data. The platform in this design fiction, thus, is not the street, but the Amazon Kindle web-services, BMW engine performance web-services, and Instagram and Twitter photo-sharing services. It is through those platforms the data produced in the streets travel through and are accumulated in. The second category of activities perhaps engages with the street in more intimate ways but again does not treat the street as a platform, instead sees it either as a resource to be managed (traffic volume, road quality, surveillance opportunities etc.) or as a resource for generating revenue (congestion tax determination, sensor-enabled advertisement screens etc.), and usually as both.
What emerges from this description of the urban data environment is less of how the street has come to function as a ‘platform’ (or built as a basic infrastructural basis with provision for various digital and analog activities to occupy it and create or amplify its functionalities) but how the street, or the entire city, is becoming an object to measure and a material context for measuring other activities. When Hill describes that the street as immersed in a cloud of data, he also reveals how his understanding of the street is immersed in the fascination and the productive promise of that data cloud. Hill goes on to discuss the importance and impact of network infrastructure on street design, and talks about the ‘locked down street’ and the ‘open source street’. Interestingly, he determines the ‘locked’ and ‘open’ characters of the street based on the accessibility status of the respective data clouds. This is a significant statement about evaluating the quality and function of a street, or a city – not in terms of its socio-cultural-economic experiences but in terms of its ability (through embedded and networked information infrastructures) to produce and distribute data about itself. The moral-functional force of this identification of ‘locked’ and ‘open’ streets, as understood from the status of its data emission and sharing, is amplified within the administrative logic of ‘smart cities’. In a similar manner, IBM defines ‘smart(er) cities' as cities that make “optimum use of all the interconnected information available today to better understand and control its operations and optimize the use of limited resources” (Kehoe et al 2011: 2). The management maxim of ‘if you cannot measure it, you cannot manage it’ captures the fundamental location of data in the specific imagination of the urban future in the ‘smart city' discourse – cities managed by a complete and relational database of all possible urban activities, premised upon extensive sensing and calculative apparatuses rendering the city entirely measurable. 
In The Urban Revolution, Henri Lefebvre identified the contemporary society as an ‘urban society’, understood as and exemplified by: 
	“... the transformations that affect contemporary society, ranging from period when questions of 	growth and industrialisation predominate (models, plans, programs) to the period when the 	urban problematic becomes predominant, when the search for solutions and modalities unique 	to urban society are foremost.” (Lefebvre 2003: 5)
He described the ceaseless expansion of the ‘urban fabric' over all previously ‘non-urban' spaces, including agrarian, oceanic, and atmospheric spaces. This is, of course, not to argue that all such spaces are being completely populated by skyscrapers and other signs of urban built form, but that those spaces are being transformed so as to address the problematic urban, to solve the ‘problem' that the urban is. The ‘urban society’ for Lefebvre, then, is not a description of the status of the contemporary society, not an ‘accomplished reality', but describes the very logic of organisation and self-conscious direction of development for the contemporary society. It describes a society that is fully restructuring itself to become more intensely and more effectively ‘urban'. The drive for cities to be ‘smart(er)' is to be read in that context. It builds on both an existing anxiety of insufficient ‘smartness' and ‘urban-ness', and the simultaneous identification of already existing potentials and resources for becoming ‘smarter' and more ‘urban'. 
Urbanisation of data means such a re-organisation of the terrain of data according to the needs of the ‘urban society'. It involves two moments. The first moment is that of the primitive or original accumulation of data as a resource. The second moment is that of its continuous extraction and investment of data to reproduce the ‘urban society' at a planetary scale (Brenner & Schmid 2011). In the previous discussion of the secret of urban data, it was noted that although various forms of urban human and non-human experiences and affects have existed all along (like, for example, the mineral ores under the surface of the earth), the possibilities  to measure, extract, store and utilise them are much more recent (like, for example, mining and utilisation of underground of mineral ores). The commonly used metaphor of ‘data mining' further highlights the appropriateness of the analogy between the economic acts of mining for minerals and data mining – both being premised upon extraction of absolute rent through monopolistic control over the resource concerned, often claimed by virtue of being the ‘first mover', in both the senses of tactical move and the imperialist or colonialist movement. However, this extraction of absolute rent from urban data streams, enforced through ‘closed garden' systems of collecting, analysing and visualising everyday data, from the level of the individual (e.g., Nike+ shoes) to urban operating systems, is necessarily preceded by the moment of primitive accumulation of data – a moment of ontological transformation of urban experiences and affects into measurable qualities. The ‘first movement' towards accumulation of urban data takes place in this phase.
Foursquare is an insightful example of such colonisation of the urban data space by a celebrated ‘Web 2.0' application. It allows people to share their location with their friends by declaring their ‘check-ins' or real-time geo-locations. While people being at a certain location at a certain time of the day is not exactly a new phenomenon, the possibility of turning such facts for a large number of people into a continuous, structured and relational database is a significant achievement. Considered a failure in monetising its services during the last few years, Foursquare has often claimed that it is interested in building the ‘location layer of the Internet'. Recently there has been a rumour that it will start selling its vast Point of Interest data (spatial data regarding locational details of places concerned), and especially data on people's activity around those Points, to Yahoo (Lynley 2013). But even if the deal does not work out, the question that remains is why should Foursquare be considered the ‘rightful owner' of such data? Even if the issues of insufficient competition in the market for (gamified) crowd-sourcing of Point of Interest data, barriers in market entry due to the ‘first-movers' advantage and vital economies of scale are kept aside and it is assumed that Foursquare did acquire such database under competitive free market situation with sufficient choice of vendors for the users of such applications, it still cannot be explained why those particular users of Foursquare have the (property) right over the material and social spaces that are the ‘checked-in' to and entered into the database.  The places they ‘check-in' to annotate and add to the database are not owned by (only) them, nor can they necessarily claim a right to represent such places and contribute metadata about them to the database concerned. The problem of colonising ‘first-mover', hence, cuts both ways – the buyer (Foursquare, in this case) captures resources before a market for it is established, and the seller (Foursquare users, in this case) transforms experiences, affects, and objects into entities that can be transacted, without having the right to undertake neither the transformation nor the transaction.
Towards a critique of urban informatics
Understanding ‘smart cities' as urbanisation of data involves not only foregrounding the secret behind urban data as the new found, clean, durable energy source for ‘smart cities' but also the deployment of such resources to expand the upgrade the capitalist ‘urban fabric'. ‘Smart cities' technologies do not simply harvest a previously untapped source of information by gathering systematic and relation datasets across urban utilities and unifying them for centralised analysis and control decisions, they transform a range of urban modes of being, from occupying space to moving or drifting through the city, to hacking into private amenity infrastructures, all into moments of potential data collection. Data,  once collected, flows through a very specifically designed network of ‘tubes' (to use Andrew Blum's word), the very topology and protocols of read/write priviledges to which determine and are determined by the power hierarchies of the city and the ‘urban society' in general. Further, the value of the mined data increases as the same (or combinable, comparable) data is collected for other places and other times. This value can be opened up for realisation and accumulation by making the mined urban data ‘addressable', ‘queryable' and ‘scriptable' (Greenfield 2010), and making it accessible and usable for the citizens through open urban data APIs. However, the capacity to use such data differs widely across various state and non-state actors. More importantly, in cities with increasing involvement of private firms in delivering public utilities and with complete dominance of private firms in the sphere of everyday softwares and media services that mediate urban living (e.g., mobile telephony companies and Facebook), opening up of urban data collected by the state is most likely to be vastly more beneficial for actors already in possession of large data sets that can be juxtaposed, combined and correlated with public datasets. Thus it often becomes essential to look for the ‘tubes' behind the celebrated sentient city infrastructures to point out how ‘intelligence' of such systems are not simply situated and driven by immediate context, but powered by industrial-scale data crunching taking place in other sites, the connected geographies of which sites are essential in understanding the urban fabric of ‘smart cities'.
Mike Crang and Stephen Graham have noted three sets of dynamics  driven by the extraction, circulation and accumulation of this urban data – ‘fantasies of friction-free consumption', ‘ambient intelligence' and data-driven  securitisation, and informatic art and activism (Crang & Graham 2007). Their emphasis, however, have been on the incompleteness of such ‘total information awareness' dreams and the high probability of persistence of “bricolage of component middleware, none of which is really designed for the task to which it is put, nor perfectly configured to work with the other middleware or devices it encounters” (Ibid.: 813). In a more recent discussion, Rob Kitchin, however, considers deployment of real-time ‘big data' driven urban administration systems to be a rather likely reality in near future, while noting possible dangers of increased corporatisation and technocratisation of governance, possibilities of technological lock-ins and multiple concerns regarding collection, analysis and representativeness of urban data (Kitchin 2013). Both these discussions of ‘smart cities', one more skeptical and the other more preemptive, emphasise upon and build their analysis of ‘smart cities' technologies upon the capabilities of codes and information network infrastructures (Kitchin & Dodge). Here the emphasis is on the second moment of urbanisation of data – the moment of urban data being redeployed through coded infrastructures for shaping the capitalist urban space. This paper attempts to push this analysis further by highlighting the first moment of urbanisation of data as well – by focusing on how the making of ‘smart cities' is built on the control over mining and production of everyday urban data. Hence, the troubling implications of such a vision is not only due to accumulation, centralisation and concentration of a common urban resource for specific circulations and deployments (either managed by the state or technology companies), but also in its transformation of the perceived, conceived and lived urban spaces, since such activities are increasingly mediated through controlled circuits of prosumtion of urban data. ‘Smart city' technologies are thus not only built upon but must reproduce the informatic mode of abstraction of urban spaces, so as to sustain its necessary qualities of addressability, queryability and scriptability to deploy, measure and manage planetary urban capitalism. Bibliography
Batty, Michael. 2012. Smart Cities, Big Data. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design. 39. Pp. 191-193.
Berners-Lee, Tim & Nigel Shadbolt. 2011. There’s Gold to be Mined from All our Data. The Times. December 31. Available at: http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/columnists/article3272618.ece or http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/273090/
Brenner, Neil & Christian Schmid. 2011. Planetary Urbanisation. In Matthew Gandy (Ed.). Urban Constellations. Berlin: Jovis. Pp. 10-13.
Buscher, Volker, Léan Doody & Dan Hill. 2010. Smart Cities: Transforming the 21st Century City via the Creative Use of Technology. Arup. Available at: http://www.arup.com/Publications/Smart_Cities.aspx
Beniger, James. 1986. The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of the Information Society. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Castells, Manuel. 1989. The Informational City: Information Technology, Economic Restructuring, and the Urban-Regional Process. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 
Crang, Mike & Stephen Graham. 2007. Sentient Cities: Ambient Intelligence and the Politics of Urban Space. Information, Communication and Society. 10:6. Pp. 789-817.
Dirks, Susanne & Mary Keeling. 2009. A Vision of Smarter Cities. Somers, NY: IBM Corporation. Available at: http://public.dhe.ibm.com/common/ssi/ecm/en/gbe03227usen/GBE03227USEN.PDF
Dodge, Martin & Rob Kitchin. 2005. Code and the Transduction of Space. Annals of the Association of American Geographers. 95(1). Pp. 162–180.
Gillespie, Tarleton. 2010. The Politics of ‘Platforms'. New Media & Society. 12(3).  May 1. Available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1601487
Graham, Stephen & Simon Marvin. 2001. Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities and the Urban Condition. London: Routledge
Greenfield, Adam. 2010. Frameworks for Citizen Responsiveness, Enhanced: Toward a Read/Write Urbanism. Adam Greenfield's Speedbird. April 24. Available at: http://speedbird.wordpress.com/2010/04/24/frameworks-for-citizen-responsiveness-enhanced-toward-a-readwrite-urbanism/
Heimgartner, Andreas, Mike Luke, Nicola Villa & Paul Johnston. 2005. Broadband City: A Roadmap for Local Government Executives. Cisco Internet Solutions Group, IBSG. Available at https://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac79/docs/wp/2010/broadband/Broadband-City.pdf
Hill, Dan. 2008. The Street as Platform. City of Sound. February 11. Available at: http://www.cityofsound.com/blog/2008/02/the-street-as-p.html
IBM Industry Solutions Division. 2011. IBM Intelligent Operations Center for Smarter Cities. IBM. Somers, NY: IBM Corporation. Available at: http://public.dhe.ibm.com/common/ssi/ecm/en/gvs03044usen/GVS03044USEN.PDF
Ingram, Mathew. 2011. New York City Sees its Future as a Data Platform. Gigaom. April 28. Available at: http://gigaom.com/2011/04/28/new-york-city-sees-its-future-as-a-data-platform/
Kehoe, Michael et al. 2011. Smarter Cities Series: A Foundation for Understanding IBM Smarter Cities. IBM Corporation. Available at: http://www.redbooks.ibm.com/redpapers/pdfs/redp4733.pdf
Kitchin, Rob. 2013. The Real-Time City? Big Data and Smart Urbanism. Paper presented at the ‘Smart Urbanism: Utopian Vision or False Dawn’ workshop at the University of Durham. June 20-21. Available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2289141 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2289141
Kittler, Friedrich A. 1996. The City is a Medium. Translated by Matthew Griffin. New Literary History. 27 (4). Pp. 712-729.
–  1999. Gramophone, Film, Typewriter. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.
Lefebvre, Henri. 2003. The Urban Revolution. Translated by Robert Bononno. Minneapolis: The University of Minnesota Press.
Linday, Greg. 2011. IBM Offers Cash-Strapped Mayors a Smarter City-in-a-Box. Fast Company. June 6. Available at: http://www.fastcompany.com/1757313/ibm-offers-cash-strapped-mayors-a-smarter-city-in-a-box
Lynley, Matthew. 2013. Yahoo, Foursquare in Talks over Data Partnership. BuzzFeed. August 21. Available at: http://www.buzzfeed.com/mattlynley/yahoo-foursquare-in-talks-over-data-partnership
Marx, Karl. 1999 (1887). Capital: A Critique of Political Economy Volume 1. Marx/Engels Internet Archive. Available at: http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/download/pdf/Capital-Volume-I.pdf
Moss Kanter, Rosabeth & Stanley S. Litow. 2009. Informed and Interconnected: A Manifesto for Smarter Cities. Working Paper 09-141. June 15. Harvard Business School. Available at: http://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Publication%20Files/09-141.pdf
O’Reilly, Tim. 2005. What is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Generation of Software. September 30. Available at: http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html
Rheingold, Howard. 2003. Cities, Swarms, Cell Phones: The Birth of Urban Informatics. The Feature. September 12. Available at: http://www.thefeaturearchives.com/topic/Culture/Cities__Swarms__Cell_Phones__The_Birth_of_Urban_Informatics.html
Savas, E. S. 1970. Cybernetics in City Hall. Science. 168 (3935). Pp. 1066-1071.
The Economist. 2010. Living on a Platform. In It’s a Smart World, A Special Report on Smart Systems. November 10-12. Pp.  6-12.
Townsend, Anthony. 2009. Foreword. In Marcus Foth (Ed.). Handbook of Research on Urban Informatics: The Practice and Promise of the Real-Time City. Hershey, New York: Information Science Reference (an Imprint of IGI Global). Pp. Xxiii-xxvii.
Villa, Nicola & Wolfgang Wagener. 2008. Connecting Cities: Achieving Sustainability through Innovation – An Overview of the Connected Urban Development Program. Cisco Internet Business Solutions Group. Available at: http://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac79/docs/wp/cud/CUD_Overarching_0214final.pdf
Villa, Nicola & Shane Mitchell. 2010. Connecting Cities: Achieving Sustainability through Innovation. Cisco Internet Business Solutions Group. Available at: http://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac79/docs/innov/Connecting_Cities_Sustainability_Through_Innovation_IBSG_1021FINAL.pdf
Williams, Amanda, Erica Robles & Paul Dourish. 2009. Urbane-ing the City: Examining and Refining the Assumptions behind Urban Informatics. In Marcus Foth (Ed.). Handbook of Research on Urban Informatics: The Practice and Promise of the Real-Time City. Hershey, New York: Information Science Reference (an Imprint of IGI Global). Pp. 1-20.










Draft paper submitted for presentation at the Special Session on ‘Smart Cities: Discourses, Policies and Technologies in the Making' at RGS-IBG Annual International Conference 2013.

Please inform author before quoting and/or referring to the paper.


Sumandro Chattapadhyay
Research Associate, The Sarai Programme
Centre for the Study of Developing Societies, New Delhi
<mail@ajantriks.net> <www.ajantriks.net>
